# Master’s Thesis in Mathematics

## Modelling and control of traffic flow on networks

by Markus Stachl, 15.04.2017

## Abstract

The flow of motorised vehicles through urban road networks is known to be one of the main
reasons for high pollution in metropolitan areas. Continuous growth of cities therefore an
increased traffic volume on roads, mainly caused by commuter traffic, triggers the need
for improved planing and optimal control of vehicular traffic. In this thesis we resort to a
macroscopic model to simulate traffic flow on networks, which was derived by Bressan et
al and which models junctions using buffers with limited capacity. This guarantees wellposedness and unique solvability of the underlying conservation law. The management
of traffic flow at junctions is handled by traffic lights, whose control influences the traffic
volume on the entire road network. We show that by controlling traffic lights using
responsive techniques like Model Predictive Control (MPC) the cumulated traffic flux can
be improved compared to traffic lights with fixed cycle length (the time difference between
red and green phases). Coupling the model of vehicular dynamics with a one-dimensional
pollution model on a road network in Munich shows that a decrease of CO−emissions
can be achieved by the optimal control of traffic lights.

## Motivation
A green wave for a driver occurs when sequential traffic lights are coordinated in a way
such that the driver is allowed to cross every intersection without having to wait in front
of a red light.
First and foremost this is convenient for the driver who can reach his destination in the
shortest time possible. Additionally studies have shown that the establishment of green
waves can have benefits not only for the general public, but also on an environmental
level.

Emissions from automobiles and trucks operating on public roads represent a major portion of the pollutants in urban areas. Besides other substances the highly poisonous gas
carbon monoxide (CO) is emitted mainly by urban traffic. CO is the most abundant air
pollutant in the lower atmosphere with exception of CO2. It is a byproduct caused by incomplete combustion of fuel used to operate cars.
A study by Kelly [32] in 2012 has shown that green wave policies have the potential to
- reduce fuel consumption of vehicles,
- reduce CO, CO2 and particulate matter (PM) caused by urban traffic,
- reduce waiting times for the driving public
- and reduce the noise caused by rapid acceleration and deceleration of cars.

In this thesis we will discuss different mathematical tools to generate green waves over a
network of several intersections in one main direction. The general approach here is to
maximize the total traffic flux on the network. The goal is to create a generic simulation
tool that compares the different mathematical methods in terms of computational effort
and optimal flux. Finally we want to see by means of post-processing the obtained data
how well the different methods perform with respect to the generated pollution.

## Contributions
This thesis offers several contributions. Firstly, to the best of our knowledge, we offer the
first numerical implementation of the buffer model proposed by Bressan et al. We provide
an intensive discussion of the benefits and limitations of this modelling approach and the
significance of buffers in real traffic networks. Secondly the switching patterns of traffic
light signals are optimized using Model Predictive Control. We can show that the total
flux can be improved significantly compared to traffic lights operating at a fixed control
strategy due to higher responsivity to changing traffic situations. Furthermore we couple
the traffic dynamics with a non-linear pollution model, where we show that the amount
of pollution generated by vehicular traffic on road networks can also be reduced. Finally
a Python framework is provided enabling the analysis of arbitrary networks in terms of
traffic flux and generated pollution

## Supplements
Implemented Python Framework can be found in the "Experiment"s folder.
